README.md, before:

![Maintained? yes](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/ansible/eda-server/graph/badge.svg?token=N6Z2DZGKGZ)](https://codecov.io/gh/ansible/eda-server)

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/actions/workflows/ci.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/actions/workflows/ci.yaml?query=branch%3Amain)

[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ansible_eda-server&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ansible_eda-server)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ansible_eda-server&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/overall?id=ansible_eda-server)

![Python 3.11](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.11-blue)
![Python 3.12](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.12-blue)

# Event Driven Ansible Controller

This repository contains the source code for the Event Driven Ansible Controller, aka EDA-Controller.

Licensed under [Apache Software License 2.0](LICENSE)

## How to install

Refer to the [deployment guide](docs/deployment.md) for further information if you want to install and run the application.

## Development environment

Refer to the [development guide](docs/development.md) for further information if you want to setup a development environment.

## Contributing

We ask all of our community members and contributors to adhere to the [Ansible code of conduct](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/community/code_of_conduct.html).
If you have questions or need assistance, please reach out to our community team at <codeofconduct@ansible.com>

Refer to the [Contributing guide](docs/contributing.md) for further information.

## Communication

See the [Communication](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/blob/main/docs/contributing.md#communication) section of the
Contributing guide to find out how to get help and contact us.

For more information about getting in touch, see the
[Ansible communication guide](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html).

## Credits

EDA-Controller is sponsored by [Red Hat, Inc](https://www.redhat.com).

Commit message:

docs: Document accessing EDA OpenAPI
This adds a specific section to the README.md explaining how to
access EDA openapi spec file, both by browsing the rendered
documentation, its equivalent openapi.json, and also examples how
to download the json file.

README.md, after:

![Maintained? yes](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)

[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/ansible/eda-server/graph/badge.svg?token=N6Z2DZGKGZ)](https://codecov.io/gh/ansible/eda-server)

[![GitHub Workflow Status](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/actions/workflows/ci.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/actions/workflows/ci.yaml?query=branch%3Amain)

[![Quality Gate Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ansible_eda-server&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/new_code?id=ansible_eda-server)
[![Coverage](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=ansible_eda-server&metric=coverage)](https://sonarcloud.io/summary/overall?id=ansible_eda-server)

![Python 3.11](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.11-blue)
![Python 3.12](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.12-blue)

# Event Driven Ansible Controller

This repository contains the source code for the Event Driven Ansible Controller, aka EDA-Controller.

Licensed under [Apache Software License 2.0](LICENSE)

## How to install

Refer to the [deployment guide](docs/deployment.md) for further information if you want to install and run the application.

## Development environment

Refer to the [development guide](docs/development.md) for further information if you want to setup a development environment.

## Contributing

We ask all of our community members and contributors to adhere to the [Ansible code of conduct](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/community/code_of_conduct.html).
If you have questions or need assistance, please reach out to our community team at <codeofconduct@ansible.com>

Refer to the [Contributing guide](docs/contributing.md) for further information.

## Communication

See the [Communication](https://github.com/ansible/eda-server/blob/main/docs/contributing.md#communication) section of the
Contributing guide to find out how to get help and contact us.

For more information about getting in touch, see the
[Ansible communication guide](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html).

## OpenAPI specification

You can access the Event Driven Ansible OpenAPI specification from a
running instance:

- API docs (browser):
  - http://$HOST:$PORT/api/eda/v1/docs/
- OpenAPI JSON:
  - http://$HOST:$PORT/api/eda/v1/openapi.json

Download examples:

```bash
# Basic auth (JSON)
curl -u admin:password \
  "http://localhost:8000/api/eda/v1/openapi.json" -o eda.json

# Token auth (JSON)
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  "http://localhost:8000/api/eda/v1/openapi.json" -o eda.json
```

Notes:
- For HTTPS with self-signed certificates, add `-k` to curl for local testing.
- The specification's `info.version` reflects the installed `aap-eda`
  package version on the running instance, from `pyproject.toml`.

## Credits

EDA-Controller is sponsored by [Red Hat, Inc](https://www.redhat.com).
