docs/deployment.md, before:

# Deployments

This document describes how to deploy the EDA-Controller.
Currently there are two ways to deploy the EDA-Controller: using docker-compose or using minikube.

If you are looking for a development environment, please refer to the [development](development.md) document.

## Docker Compose

### Prerequisites

* [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) or [Podman](https://podman.io/)
* [Docker Compose plugin](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) or `docker-compose` python package.
* [Taskfile](https://taskfile.dev/)

#### Docker

You'll need to install Docker or Podman.

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Docker).

#### Podman

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Podman).

#### Taskfile

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Taskfile).

### Deployment steps

#### Clone the repository

```shell
git clone git@github.com:ansible/aap-eda.git
```

#### Running services

```shell
cd tools/docker
```

You may want to pull the latest images from the registry:

```shell
docker-compose -p eda -f docker-compose-stage.yaml pull
```

You can start all services with:

```shell
docker-compose -p eda -f docker-compose-stage.yaml up
```

Note: **You can use the environment variables `EDA_IMAGE_URL` and `EDA_UI_IMAGE_URL` to use a different image url. By default is the latest code from the main branch.**

## Deploy using Minikube and Taskfile

Minikube is the recommended method for macOS users

### Requirements

* [Kubernetes CLI (kubectl)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-linux/)
* [kustomize](https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/installation/kustomize/)
* [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)
* [Taskfile](https://taskfile.dev/installation/#binary)
* bash, version 3.* or above

### Deployment steps

1. Copy environment properties example file to default location

   ```shell
   cp ./tools/deploy/environment.properties.example ./tools/deploy/environment.properties
   ```

2. Edit ./tools/deploy/environment.properties file and add your values.

3. Start minikube if it is not already running:

   ```shell
   minikube start
   ```

4. Ensure minikube instance is up and running:

   ```shell
   minikube status
   ```

5. Run the deployment:

   ```shell
   task minikube:all
   ```

6. Forward the webserver port to the localhost:

   ```shell
   task minikube:fp:ui
   ```

**Note**: For fedora, the binary may be `go-task`.

You can now access the UI at <http://localhost:8080/eda/> using the above credentials.

Commit message:

Update docker-compose-stage (#214)
That would allow us to run a deployment able to integrate with AWX and
rootless podman in linux hosts.
Includes:

- Removes the "url" from the name of the image_url envvar. 
- Adds configuration to mount the podman socket. (socket path variables
+ run as root for rootless podman by default)
- Adds configuration for AWX integration
- Updates docs accordingly

docker-compose-dev is not covered as we need to investigate another
approach because changing the user_id would break the bind mounts. Also
we have issues with mac as the support to mount the sockets there is
problematic. We have the plan to add a new composer file for mac that
overrides the worker conf with proper instructions. Discussed with
@mkanoor

---------

Co-authored-by: Tom Tuffin <71447672+ttuffin@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/deployment.md, after:

# Deployments

This document describes how to deploy the EDA-Controller.
Currently there are two ways to deploy the EDA-Controller: using docker-compose or using minikube.

If you are looking for a development environment, please refer to the [development](development.md) document.

## Docker Compose

### Prerequisites

* [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) or [Podman](https://podman.io/)
* [Docker Compose plugin](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) or `docker-compose` python package.
* [Taskfile](https://taskfile.dev/)

#### Docker

You'll need to install Docker or Podman.

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Docker).

#### Podman

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Podman).

#### Taskfile

For further information please refer our [guidelines](development.md#Taskfile).

### Deployment steps

#### Clone the repository

```shell
git clone git@github.com:ansible/aap-eda.git
```

#### Configure podman socket

Eda-server needs to be able to communicate with the podman socket. To do so, you need to mount it in the worker pod. This can be done setting the environment variable `EDA_HOST_PODMAN_SOCKET_URL` pointing to the path of the podman socket in the host. For example:

```shell
export EDA_HOST_PODMAN_SOCKET_URL=$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/podman/podman.sock
```

#### Configure AWX integration

You might want to configure the AWX integration. To do so, you need to set the environment variables `EDA_CONTROLLER_URL`, `EDA_CONTROLLER_TOKEN` and `EDA_CONTROLLER_SSL_VERIFY`. For example:

```shell
  export EDA_CONTROLLER_URL=https://awx-example.com
  export EDA_CONTROLLER_TOKEN=some-secret-token
  export EDA_CONTROLLER_SSL_VERIFY=yes
```

```shell
cd tools/docker
```

You may want to pull the latest images from the registry:

```shell
docker-compose -p eda -f docker-compose-stage.yaml pull
```

You can start all services with:

```shell
docker-compose -p eda -f docker-compose-stage.yaml up
```

Note: **You can use the environment variables `EDA_IMAGE_URL` and `EDA_UI_IMAGE_URL` to use a different image url. By default is the latest code from the main branch.**

## Deploy using Minikube and Taskfile

Minikube is the recommended method for macOS users

### Requirements

* [Kubernetes CLI (kubectl)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-linux/)
* [kustomize](https://kubectl.docs.kubernetes.io/installation/kustomize/)
* [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/)
* [Taskfile](https://taskfile.dev/installation/#binary)
* bash, version 3.* or above

### Deployment steps

1. Copy environment properties example file to default location

   ```shell
   cp ./tools/deploy/environment.properties.example ./tools/deploy/environment.properties
   ```

2. Edit ./tools/deploy/environment.properties file and add your values.

3. Start minikube if it is not already running:

   ```shell
   minikube start
   ```

4. Ensure minikube instance is up and running:

   ```shell
   minikube status
   ```

5. Run the deployment:

   ```shell
   task minikube:all
   ```

6. Forward the webserver port to the localhost:

   ```shell
   task minikube:fp:ui
   ```

**Note**: For fedora, the binary may be `go-task`.

You can now access the UI at <http://localhost:8080/eda/> using the above credentials.
